# UX Hallucinations
There is a TEDTalk by Martin Scorsese, about how they orchestrated a scene of the Apollo 13 rocket blasting off into space from the launchpad. In the talk, he explains something that I have applied on a number of occasions in usability tests that worked incredibly well: tapping in to peoples hallucinations. The way the talk goes he explains that they showed original NASA footage of the actual Apollo 13 rocket blasting off and then they asked participants in the study to recall the scene shot for shot and what they found was that people misremembered the scene in Waze that were so much more fantastic Than reality. Now this is not a profound or new phenomenon. What is interesting about it is that it was used to creatively direct. Audiences that watched the NASA footage for the first time compared with the falsified footage based on peoples memory of the genuine article resulted in people, almost unanimously, choosing the fake footage as the genuine article. there’s a name for this: the hyper real. 
￼Hyper Real Testing
To conduct a hyperreal test all you have to do is present some form of media to a Ip in a usability interview and tack on one extra question at the end, ask the person to describe everything that they saw in as much details as possible to the best of their recollection The answers recorded from this one simple question will reveal a lot. If the test resulted in a positive experience, the user will hallucinate and even more positive experience. If the experience was negative, they will inevitably hallucinate, and even more negative experience to take this further, if rapid prototyping is available, such that the thing that they interacted with can be made to match up with what they described quickly enough you can even present what they described back to them and repeat the process. This is unrealistic within a single day or a single session, but it is realistic within a months worth of time to show four different iterations to four different participants, each one building on the previous feedback, the keyword here is feedback but not in a marketing or traditional sense more in the literal sense you want to create a loop where you feed the users vision back into the product and the best way to do that is to not continue to use the thing that you gave them, but to give the next person the best of what the previous person had to offer.